New article "Correct grammar with the Proofreader API" (#3647)
MicrosoftDocs/edge-developer: microsoft-edge/web-platform/proofreader-api.md

        * [Monitor the progress of the model download](#monitor-the-progress-of-the-model-download)
    * [Run the Proofreader API](#run-the-proofreader-api)
    * [Use the result of the Proofreader API](#use-the-result-of-the-proofreader-api)
    * [Destroy a session](#destroy-a-session)
        * [Destroy a session by using the destroy() method](#destroy-a-session-by-using-the-destroy-method)
        * [Destroy a session by using an AbortController](#destroy-a-session-by-using-an-abortcontroller)
* [Send feedback](#send-feedback)
* [See also](#see-also)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Availability of the Proofreader API

The Proofreader API is available as a developer preview in Microsoft Edge Canary or Dev channels, starting with version 142.

The Proofreader API is optimized to correct grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors in text content.  To learn more about an alternative for more custom prompt engineering scenarios that may not be served by these APIs, see [Prompt a built-in language model with the Prompt API](./prompt-api.md).

<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## Alternatives to and benefits of the Proofreader API

Author: ```suggestion
## Decide which API to use
```

The Proofreader API uses a small language model (SLM) that runs on the same device where the inputs to and outputs of the model are used (that is, locally).  This has the following benefits compared to cloud-based solutions:

* **Reduced cost:** There's no cost associated with using a cloud AI service.

* **Network independence:** Beyond the initial model download, there's no network latency when prompting the model, and the model can also be used when the device is offline.

* **Improved privacy:** The data input to the model never leaves the device and is not collected to train AI models.

The Proofreader API use a model that's provided by Microsoft Edge and built into the browser, which comes with the additional benefits over custom local solutions such as those based on WebGPU, WebNN, or WebAssembly:

* **Shared one-time cost:** The browser-provided model is downloaded when the API is called for the first time, and then the model is shared across all websites that run in the browser, reducing network costs for the user and developer.

> * **Simplified usage for web developers:** The built-in model can be run by using straightforward web APIs and doesn't require AI/ML expertise or using third-party frameworks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Simplified usage for web developers:** The built-in model can be run by using straightforward web APIs, and doesn't require AI/ML expertise or using third-party frameworks.
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## The Phi-4-mini model

The Proofreader API uses the Phi-4-mini model — a powerful small language model that excels at text-based tasks — built into Microsoft Edge.  To learn more about Phi-4-mini and its capabilities, see the model card at [microsoft/Phi-4-mini-instruct](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/Phi-4-mini-instruct).

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Disclaimer

Like other language models, the Phi family of models can potentially behave in ways that are unfair, unreliable, or offensive.  To learn more about the model's AI considerations, see [Responsible AI Considerations](https://huggingface.co/microsoft/Phi-4-mini-instruct#responsible-ai-considerations).

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Hardware requirements

The Proofreader API developer preview is intended to work on devices with hardware capabilities that produce SLM outputs with predictable quality and latency.

> The Proofreader API is currently limited to:

Reviewer: Add "Requires..." to each list item?  maybe the lead-in is the problem and should say Requirements:.  Compare sibling articles. 

Per timeless docs, don't say "currently".

The lead-in is contradictory of some list items:

The Proofreader API is currently limited to: ... At least 20 GB available

1. Optionally, to log information locally that may be useful for debugging issues, also enable the **Enable on device AI model debug logs** flag.

1. Restart Microsoft Edge Canary or Dev.

1. To check if your device meets the hardware requirements for the Proofreader API developer preview, open a new tab, go to `edge://on-device-internals`, and check the **Device performance class** value.

   If your device performance class is **High** or greater, the Proofreader API should be supported on your device.  If you continue to notice issues, please [file a new issue](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/issues/new?template=proofreader-api.md).

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## See a working example

To see the Proofreader API in action, and review existing code that uses these APIs:

1. [Enable the Proofreader API](#enable-the-proofreader-api), as described above.

1. In Microsoft Edge Canary or Dev browser, open a tab or window and go to the [Proofreader API playground](https://microsoftedge.github.io/Demos/built-in-ai/playgrounds/proofreader-api/).

> 1. In the information banner at the top, check the status: it initially reads **On-device API and model downloading.**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the information banner at the top, check the status.  The status initially reads **On-device API and model downloading**:
```

   ![Status indicator showing model downloading progress](./proofreader-api-images/model-downloading.png)

   After the model has downloaded, the information banner reads **On-device API and model available**, indicating that the API and model can be used:

   ![Status indicator showing API and model ready](./proofreader-api-images/api-and-model-ready.png)

   If the model download doesn't start, restart Microsoft Edge and try again.

   The Proofreader API is only supported on devices that meet certain hardware requirements.  For more information, see [Hardware requirements](#hardware-requirements), above.

1. Optionally change the settings in the page, such as the text to proofread and the expected input language.

1. Click the **Proofread** button, at the bottom of the page.

   The output is generated in the response section of the page:

>    ![The Proofreader demo page with settings and a Proorfread button](./proofreader-api-images/proofreading.png)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   ![The Proofreader demo page, containing settings and a Proofread button](./proofreader-api-images/proofreading.png)
```

See also:

> * [/built-in-ai/](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/tree/main/built-in-ai/) - Source code and Readme for the Built-in AI playgrounds demo.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [/built-in-ai/](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/Demos/tree/main/built-in-ai/) - Readme and source code for the Built-in AI playgrounds demo.
```
from experience: read the Readme first, before trying to run demo or view source code.  But that was a different context:

In that other case, the article presented combined links like:
[the running demo] | [the Readme]
yet it was required that you read the Readme, and do some setup, before attempting to view the real Demo running.  You could only see an empty demo page, until doing a step in the Readme.

if (availability == "unavailable") {
  // The model is not available.
}

if (availability == "downloadable" || availability == "downloading") {
  // The model can be used, but it needs to be downloaded first.
}

if (availability == "available") {
  // The model is available and can be used.
}
```

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Create a new session

Creating a session instructs the browser to load the language model in memory, so that it can be used.  Before you can use the Proofreader API to correct text, create a new session by using the `create()` method:

```javascript
// Create a Proofreader session.
const session = await Proofreader.create();
```

To customize the model session, you can pass options to the `create()` method:

```javascript
// Create a Proofreader session with options.
const session = await Proofreader.create(options);
```

The available options are listed below:

| **Option** | **Description** |
| --- | --- |
| `monitor` | A function that's used to monitor the progress of the model download. See [Monitor the progress of the model download](#monitor-the-progress-of-the-model-download), below. |

> | `expectedInputLanguages` | An array of strings listing the languages which the input text is expected to contain. For example: `["en"]`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `expectedInputLanguages` | An array of strings.  Each string is a language that the input text is expected to contain. For example: `["en"]`. |
```
@captainbrosset pls list more than 1 item in the array

});
```

<!-- ------------------------------ -->
#### Destroy a session

Destroy the session to let the browser know that you don't need the language model anymore, so that the model can be unloaded from memory.

You can destroy a session in two different ways:
* By using the `destroy()` method.
* By using an `AbortController`.

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Destroy a session by using the destroy() method

You can use the `session.destroy()` method to destroy a Proofreader session:

```javascript
const session = await Proofreader.create();

// Later, destroy the session by using the destroy method.
session.destroy();
```

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Destroy a session by using an AbortController

Alternatively, you can create an `AbortController` object, create a `Proofreader` session, and then call `abort()`:

```javascript
// Create an AbortController object.
const controller = new AbortController();

// Create a Proofreader session and pass the 
// AbortController signal object by using the signal option.
const session = await Proofreader.create({ signal: controller.signal });

> // Later, perhaps when the user interacts with the UI, destroy the session by

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Later, such as when the user interacts with the UI, destroy the session by
```

    * [Disclaimer](#disclaimer)
    * [Hardware requirements](#hardware-requirements)
    * [Model availability](#model-availability)
* [Enable the Proofreader API](#enable-the-proofreader-api)
* [See a working example](#see-a-working-example)
* [Use the Proofreader API](#use-the-proofreader-api)
    * [Check if the API is enabled](#check-if-the-api-is-enabled)
    * [Check if the model can be used](#check-if-the-model-can-be-used)
    * [Create a new session](#create-a-new-session)
        * [Monitor the progress of the model download](#monitor-the-progress-of-the-model-download)
    * [Run the Proofreader API](#run-the-proofreader-api)
    * [Use the result of the Proofreader API](#use-the-result-of-the-proofreader-api)
    * [Destroy a session](#destroy-a-session)
        * [Destroy a session by using the destroy() method](#destroy-a-session-by-using-the-destroy-method)
        * [Destroy a session by using an AbortController](#destroy-a-session-by-using-an-abortcontroller)
* [Send feedback](#send-feedback)
* [See also](#see-also)

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Availability of the Proofreader API

> The Proofreader API is available as a developer preview in Microsoft Edge Canary or Dev channels, starting with version 143<!-- todo: add the correct version. -->.

Reviewer: 143? add correct version

The Proofreader API is optimized to correct grammar, spelling, and punctuation errors in text content.  To learn more about an alternative for more custom prompt engineering scenarios that may not be served by these APIs, see [Prompt a built-in language model with the Prompt API](./prompt-api.md).

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Alternatives to and benefits of the Proofreader API

To leverage AI capabilities in websites and browser extensions, you can also use the following methods:

* Send network requests to cloud-based AI services, such as [Azure AI solutions](https://azure.microsoft.com/solutions/ai).

* Run local AI models using the [Web Neural Network (WebNN) API](https://webmachinelearning.github.io/webnn-intro/) or [ONNX Runtime for Web](https://onnxruntime.ai/docs/tutorials/web/).

The Proofreader API uses a small language model (SLM) that runs on the same device where the inputs to and outputs of the model are used (that is, locally).  This has the following benefits compared to cloud-based solutions:

* **Reduced cost:** There's no cost associated with using a cloud AI service.

> * **Network independence:** Beyond the initial model download, there's no network latency when prompting the model, and may also be used when the device is offline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **Network independence:** Beyond the initial model download, there's no network latency when prompting the model, and the Xyz can also be used when the device is offline.
```
* missing subject
* usu. avoid "may" - https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/style-guide/a-z-word-list-term-collections/c/can-may

1. In Microsoft Edge Canary or Dev, open a new tab or window and go to `edge://flags/`.

1. In the search box, at the top of the page, enter **Proofreader API for Phi mini**.

   The page is filtered to show the matching flag.

1. Select **Enabled** next to the **Proofreader API for Phi mini** flag:

   ![Flags page of browser](./proofreader-api-images/flags-proofreader-api.png)

1. Optionally, to log information locally that may be useful for debugging issues, also enable the **Enable on device AI model debug logs** flag.

1. Restart Microsoft Edge Canary or Dev.

1. To check if your device meets the hardware requirements for the Proofreader API developer preview, open a new tab, go to `edge://on-device-internals`, and check the **Device performance class** value.

   If your device performance class is **High** or greater, the Proofreader API should be supported on your device.  If you continue to notice issues, please [file a new issue](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/issues/new?template=proofreader-api.md).

<!-- ====================================================================== -->

> ## See working a example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## See a working example
```

You can use the `session.destroy()` method to destroy a Proofreader session:

```javascript
const session = await Proofreader.create();

// Later, destroy the session by using the destroy method.
session.destroy();
```

<!-- ---------- -->
###### Destroy a session by using an AbortController

Alternatively, you can create an `AbortController` object, create a `Proofreader` session, and then call `abort()`:

```javascript
// Create an AbortController object.
const controller = new AbortController();

// Create a Proofreader session and pass the 
// AbortController signal object by using the signal option.
const session = await Proofreader.create({ signal: controller.signal });

// Later, perhaps when the user interacts with the UI, destroy the session by
// calling the abort() function of the AbortController object.
controller.abort();
```

<!-- ====================================================================== -->
## Send feedback

We're very interested in learning about the range of scenarios for which you intend to use the Proofreader API, any issues with the API or language model, and whether new task-specific APIs would be useful.

> To send feedback about your scenarios and the tasks you want to achieve, please add a comment to [the Proofreader API feedback issue](https://github.com/MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers/issues/XYZ)<!-- todo: create a feedback issue -->.

Reviewer: create feedback Issue
